Our worldwide brotherhood is truly special.
When our brothers are in need, we want to help in whatever way possible.
It also brings us great joy to be with our brothers, whether at meetings,
the field service, or on other occasions.
We love our brothers and enjoy spending time with them.
At the same time, because we are all imperfect,
our love and unity will be tested.
We may have our feelings hurt.
Or, we may hurt the feelings of others.
That brings me to the theme I would like to discuss with you in this month's program.
Settling differences brings Jehovah's favor.
It is based on Matthew 6.14.
Let's read this important verse together.
Right after teaching his disciples how to pray,
Jesus says in verse 14,
For if you forgive men, their trespasses,
your Heavenly Father will also forgive you.
Do what extent do Jesus' words affect how Jehovah views
what we do each day and our worship to him?
Consider this.
You're concluding your day in prayer.
You pray for Jehovah's name to be sanctified.
You pray for his kingdom to come.
You ask that he bless the governing body and the brothers taking the lead.
You share with him a few matters of personal concern.
And then you say,
Jehovah, I know I'm imperfect and I sinned against you often.
Please forgive me for my sins.
Let me stand before you in a clean and approved state.
Now, the question is,
has Jehovah heard your heart felt request?
Will he forgive you?
Well, what did Jesus say?
Look again at verse 14.
For if you forgive men, their trespasses,
your Heavenly Father will also forgive you.
Did you notice Jesus' use of the word if?
That tells us that forgiveness is not automatic.
It comes with a condition or price.
What price?
According to Jesus,
if we forgive others,
the condition has been met.
The price has been paid.
What will Jehovah do for us?
Jesus said he will also forgive you.
Really though,
is it fair or reasonable for Jehovah to say to us,
only if you forgive others
than I will also forgive you?
Well, suppose you get very sick and lose your job.
You're unable to pay rent for many months.
Your situation is desperate.
You have very few of any options.
You worry about your wife and your children.
Say you go to the owner of the house
and ask if he would give you time to get back on your feet.
Once you get better and are able to work again,
you will do everything within your power
to pay him what you owe.
He tells you not to worry.
He understands your situation.
He will cancel your debt.
And you do not have to pay him any rent
until your situation improves.
In fact, he'll cover your monthly expenses
until you're able to care for your family.
How would you feel about what he has done?
And would this affect how you treat others?
Well, because of our sinful nature,
we are all in debt to Jehovah, deserving of death.
We are unable to cover our expenses.
But when we go to Jehovah in prayer
and beg for his help
and his great mercy and kindness,
he tells us not to worry.
He has given the life of his son to pay our debt.
And on the basis of that sacrifice,
he is willing to cover our expenses,
the sins we commit daily
and to extend forgiveness to us
until we're able to get back on our feet
when we reach perfection in the new world.
So think again about those simple yet powerful words
of Jesus at Matthew 6.14.
Pray if you forgive men their trespasses,
your Heavenly Father will also forgive you.
Is that fair?
Is that reasonable?
Is it realistic?
Without a doubt?
In fact, settling differences
or forgiving others freely
is one of the best ways
to imitate Jehovah's compassionate
and merciful nature.
What can help us to settle differences quickly?
The first thing we should do is
to try and let love cover over the wrong.
Can I just forgive and forget?
If we're able to do so,
this is a beautiful way
to maintain the congregation's peace and unity.
But if we're struggling to forget the wrong,
there are two scriptures
that are especially helpful
in this matter of settling differences.
They are Matthew 5, 23 and 24
and Matthew 18, 15 through 17.
Keep in mind that these texts
are not referring to the same scenarios
nor are they to be applied in the exact same way.
Matthew chapter 5 has a broader application
and can be used to bring peace in most situations.
Matthew chapter 18 has a more limited application
and applies to specific situations
that are more serious in nature.
Now let's consider the first text,
Matthew 5, 23 and 24.
If then you're bringing your gift to the altar
and there you remember
that your brother has something against you,
leave your gift there in front of the altar
and go away.
First, make your peace with your brother
and then come back and offer your gift.
To truly capture what these two brief verses
mean for you and me today,
we have to understand what Jesus words meant
in his first century Jewish listeners.
Picture the scene in your mind
as we transport ourselves
in the city of Jerusalem some 2,000 years ago.
It is during one of the annual festivals.
There are tens of thousands of people in the city.
You are there to make your sacrifice a beautiful lamb
the best one you have.
It's clean and unblemished.
You take the lamb through a series of courts
all the way to the court of priests.
It has taken you most of the day to get there.
Now you're ready to put your hands on that animal
and offer a prayer for forgiveness
and then you remember something.
What?
Verse 23 reads,
if then you are bringing your gift to the altar
and there you remember that your brother
has something against you.
Now you think,
my brother does have something against me.
The last time I saw him,
he greeted everybody else but me.
He was upset, but what is it?
I don't remember doing anything.
He is so sensitive.
He's always upset with something.
Did Jesus have all of that in mind
when he said what he did in verse 23?
No.
He did not go into detail about what that something might be.
He doesn't say who is right or wrong.
He doesn't make a comment about whether someone is too sensitive,
always getting upset, never satisfied,
difficult to get along with.
Why not?
Because the reason behind the something
is not the important thing.
What is the important thing?
That the peace has been disturbed.
There is a difference that needs to be settled.
A lack of peace between brothers
could affect their relationship with Jehovah.
That is important.
So what should be done?
We see the answer in verse 24.
Leave your gift there in front of the altar
and go away.
First, make your peace with your brother
and then come back and offer your gift.
That animal sacrifice is important too.
There's no doubt about that.
It represents worship to Jehovah
like going to the meetings
in the field service,
sharing and family worship.
But according to Jesus, what is more important?
It is settling the difference,
making peace with our brother first,
then we will be in an acceptable position
to offer our gift of worship to Jehovah.
Yes, settling differences will bring Jehovah's favor.
But when can we apply the principle of Matthew 5?
Whenever there is a difference to be settled?
Perhaps our brother misunderstood what we said or did
or maybe he didn't misunderstand.
Maybe we did give him a valid reason to be hurt.
Regardless, we notice that he has something against us.
In that case, we make peace.
We can also use the principles of this text
when we are hurt or have something against our brother.
We can take the initiative ourselves
to settle misunderstandings,
to resolve differences and to make peace with our brother.
Again, Jehovah blesses such a spirit.
Now open your Bible to Matthew chapter 18.
We mentioned earlier that it has a more limited application.
How so?
Notice verse 15.
Moreover, if your brother commits a sin,
go and reveal his fault between you and him along.
If he listens to you, you have gained your brother.
Here Jesus says, if your brother commits a sin,
that is much different than just having something against us.
We are talking about a situation that is much more serious.
What situation?
The revise organized to do Jehovah's will book page 136
explains that it involves financial or property matters
such as failing to repay a loan or committing fraud.
Are the offence might be slander,
which seriously affects someone's reputation?
Of course, there are sins that could be resolved
between the individual's concern,
but are also serious enough to merit expulsion
from the congregation if not settled.
Before we start applying Matthew 18.15,
we should first consider whether it is really necessary
to pursue the matter.
Could we simply forgive the individual
for what was done or even take the loss
if it were a financial matter?
That is a personal decision.
If we decide to pursue the matter, what do we do?
Jesus helps us in verse 15 when he says
that we reveal his fault between the two of us alone.
We do not discuss the matter with others,
attempting to get them to side with us.
We do not go straight to the elders
and try to get them to solve the problem for us.
No, we try to resolve the matter between us.
And since our goal is to settle the difference,
maintain our relationship with Jehovah
and help our brother do the same,
we make repeated efforts to speak with him
when our initial efforts are unsuccessful.
Keep in mind that Jesus did not say
go only once and reveal his fault.
When applying this first step,
make it clear that your motive is to gain your brother.
Also, it would be helpful to clearly state
that you are applying the first step
in settling differences
as outlined by Jesus at Matthew 1815.
Of course, this would be stated in a kindly,
non-threatening manner,
but still in a way to show the seriousness
of getting the matter settled.
What if the first step in gaining your brother
is unsuccessful?
Notice first 16 explains step two.
But if he does not listen,
take along with you one or two more
so that on the testimony of two or three witnesses,
every matter may be established.
Yes, we talk with him in the company of one or two more.
Would that be our best friends?
No, the whole purpose is to gain our brother.
Heaming up with two of our best friends
could alienate our brother.
Instead, it makes sense
that we would choose other mature Christians.
How would mature Christians be helpful?
Well, are we misunderstanding things?
Could they help him to reason about the matter?
Could a solution be found?
Having spiritually mature witnesses there
may help to resolve the matter.
Generally, applying steps one and two
will result in gaining your brother
in preserving the peace of the congregation.
If he does not respond to these repeated efforts
to help him, then what?
You have a decision to make.
Are you willing to forgive your brother?
Even take a loss if a financial matter is involved?
If you choose to pursue the matter further,
listen to Jesus' words recorded at verse 17.
If he does not listen to them,
speak to the congregation.
If he does not listen even to the congregation,
let him be to you just as a man of the nations
and as a tax collector.
At this point, the body of elders
representing the congregation will get involved.
They will review the facts of the case
and determine if a judicial committee
should be appointed.
Happily though, these situations are rare
and matters are often resolved peacefully
before reaching such a serious point.
Think back again to that heartfelt prayer to Jehovah.
Has Jehovah heard our sincere requests?
Will he forgive?
Well, at this moment, if you realize
there is a difference with your brother
that needs to be settled,
pray to Jehovah about the matter.
Ask him to help you see beyond the emotion
and make peace.
Do not let any more time go by.
Once we have followed the simple steps
outlined by Jesus and have forgiven others,
the condition has been met.
The price has been paid.
Then what will Jehovah do for us?
Jesus said he will also forgive us.
As a result,
we will gain the peace of mind
that comes with a clean conscience
knowing that we have Jehovah's favor in blessing.
We can then make a valuable contribution
to the beautiful United Brotherhood
that we are privileged to be a part of.